Have you ever seen light rays coming
through the holes of a damaged roof?
You'll be surprised to know,
as you can see,
that the light rays from such holes
produce images of the sun
when they fall on the ground.
Why?
Because these irregular shaped holes
in the roof act as pinhole cameras.
Now, what are pinhole cameras?
Let's first come construct one pinhole
camera and then let's try
to understand the principle.
Now, by definition,
a pinhole camera is a simple optical
device that forms an image
without using a lens or a mirror.
That's surprising.
Now let's join two hollow cylindrical
boxes of different diameters
in such a way that one box can
just slide within the other.
Now what do we do?
We make a small hole in the larger
cylinder there and also make two
holes in the smaller cylinder.
The one inside fine,
but there is one care you need to take.
The inner hole has to be rectangular
and the outer hole has to be circular.
We now fix a translucent paper,
say a tracing paper,
on the rectangular hole,
because that's going to act as a screen.
Now, very importantly,
these two cylinders must be enclosed so
that you can prevent light
from entering the larger cylinder.
That will mess up our image.
Now use this pinhole camera
and try looking at the tree.
Surprise.
A clear image of this tree can be obtained
on the screen if you slide
the smaller cylinder back and forth.
Now, how exactly did it happen?
Let's look at this diagram.
The tree is, say M-N-M is the topmost
point, n is the bottom most point.
The light rays coming from the bottom
of the tree, that is N.
They pass through the small hole and flag
the screen at the top of the axis n dash.
Can you see that?
And the light rays coming from the top
of the tree, that is M, strike at the
bottom of the axis, that is M dash.
Now, what happens as a result,
as you can see, and inverted,
and also a much smaller image of the tree,
is what you get on the tracing paper.
Remember the tracing paper
which acted as a screen.
Now, the size and contrast of this image,
it can be adjusted for that.
All you need to do is slide
the smaller cylinder.
Also, one more thing.
The image depends
on the size of the pinhole.
The smaller the pinhole,
the sharper will be the image ma'am,
and of course, vice versa.